Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 09 frontiersin.org3.2.12. Food packaging is an information source 
on both product and packaging sustainability
As one of the main contacts in the consumer journey, the package 
itself has increasingly become an effective way to communicate with 
consumers and other stakeholders about sustainability ( Wyrwa and 
Barska, 2017 ). Consumers use multiple attributes and cues, such as 
packaging design ( Otto et al., 2021 ), verbal attributes (e.g., text labels, 
logos and other cues), symbolic and text-based cues ( Dinh et al., 2022 ) 
to evaluate the sustainability of the food product (such as product 
composition or shelf-life) and its packaging (such as showing garbage 
sorting instructions; Magnier and Crié, 2015 ). This dual task can 
sometimes confuse users if not sufficiently explicit.
4. Updated and holistic definition for 
sustainable food packaging
The search for sustainable packaging solutions is constantly 
evolving. Thanks to innovation in the food packaging field, 
technological advances, and impact assessment methodologies, a fixed 
definition of packaging sustainability is logically not possible. 
However, results provided in this work suggest that there are some 
major aspects that contribute to a sustainability definition for food 
packaging. A definition that includes all these aspects while giving 
space to future innovation is required ( Santi et al., 2022 ). Therefore, a 
holistic definition of ‘sustainable food packaging’ is proposed here to 
be used by the broader food packaging community, in both scientific 
and mainstream publications.
Sustainable food packaging is an optimized, measured (quantified) 
and validated solution, which takes into consideration the balance of 
social, economic, ecological and safe implementations of the circular 
value chain, based on the entire history (life cycle) of the food product-
package unit.
While the holistic definition was created specifically for the food 
domain, it can be also applied to other areas with minor changes. The 
definition offered takes into consideration the balance of the lowest 
possible use of resources (e.g.: rational use of ecologically available 
resources, avoidance of unnecessary overconsumption) and at the 
same time all direct and indirect environmental impacts. It includes 
all aspects of the food-packaging unit, as well as all stakeholders and 
actors needs along the supply chain, while being efficient, effective, 
cyclic and safe ( Lewis et  al., 2007 , 2010 ). Furthermore, it should 
be produced from renewable sources, preferably using land and water 
resources that do not displace food and feed. This holistic perspective 
is key to the ability to take into consideration food safety and 
packaging functionality into the equation, including consumers, who 
play a key role in ensuring that the intended design is implemented.
The analysis of definitions also shows the necessity to broaden and 
deepen the aspects of measurement and metrics of sustainable 
packaging and to open a new debate in future publications. 
Measurement is an important step of the current definition, however 
exact measures that would be associated with this new definition is 
not offered here. There are a plethora of metrics to assess packaging 
sustainability (e.g.: LCA, Ellen McArthur Circularity index), and the 
landscape is dynamic, often new metrics emerge. Although the 
measurement of sustainability is still not a fully harmonized practice 
and often under debate, it should be made a priority to have systems 
in place that allow comparisons between solutions as they become 
available. It is then clear that there is a need to come up not only with a common definition, but a ‘standard’ to evaluate sustainability in this 
field. This would reduce the number of vague, confusing, or even 
misleading claims, and align common metrics for what sustainability 
is really about. As there are already problems with the ESG reporting 
skewing by the companies due to vague framework and assessment, 
the terminology and research must include strictly measured data 
with well defined goals, metrics and research framework.
It is then not only important to choose the appropriate material, and 
to design the appropriate packaging solution, but also awareness, 
education, and communication to the end users are required to ensure 
that the package solution ends up being treated and used the way it is 
intended. Compostability, recyclability, reuse rates for food packaging will 
continue to be limited if the practical implementation challenges (such as 
infrastructure) are not overcome, and unless the entire community does 
not resort to harmonized policies that reduce these practical challenges. 
In the case of food packaging, a consumer centered approach is key to 
ensure that the material does not end up as litter or landfill.
Being a balancing act, a sustainable food package solution may not 
be  perfect, but contextual, suboptimal and in need of constant 
validation. It is important to note that food product designers, food 
scientists and food packaging practitioners have in common the social 
responsibility to find the best solution, even when it is not necessarily 
easy, affordable or convenient, and when it may require organizational 
changes, as we strive to reach global sustainability goals.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included in 
the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed 
to the corresponding author.
Author contributions
KRD and MC: conceptualization and methodology. KRD: 
writing—original draft preparation. KRD, IU-U, VK, RW , and MC: 
writing—review and editing. KRD, IU-U, VK, RW , LI, IK, GC, PC, 
MCF, MKP , EA, BM, VF, AA, SY , FP , MD, LJ, VC, and MC: editing. All 
authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
Funding
This article/publication is based upon work from COST Action 
Circul-a-bility, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science 
and Technology; www.cost.eu ).
Acknowledgments
Authors would like to thank Anne Mette Emdal Navntoft, from 
Aarhus University Library, for her expert advice on the literature search.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.