Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 05 frontiersin.orgpackaging, however the concept shifts the focus more to the life-
cycle (resource cycles) and to the end of life of the material ( Testa 
et al., 2020 ), in spite of the fact that avoidance should be the highest 
priority in the decision tree. Re-introducing a material to avoid the 
use of virgin resources may at times be costly, or very difficult to be proven safe ( Nerín et al., 2022 ; Tsochatzis et al., 2022 ). Reusing, 
mechanical or chemical recycling are all within the circular 
packaging definition, and the origin of the material (e.g.: from 
renewable sources, fossil fuel) or the amount of resources (energy, 
raw materials, etc) are not included in the definitions. Their end of 
life can also be quite varying, for example, in the case of compostable 
materials, their conditions for compostability may vary from simple 
household composting to complex industrial composting. Similarly, 
recycling can be  chemical, mechanical, and may result in a 
downgrade of the material. Furthermore, in this category of terms, 
there is no reference to the specific functions (i.e., protection) that 
the packaging material may impart to the food.
3.1.3. Bio packaging
This is a diverse and slightly ill-defined category, since packages 
in this category can also be  those labeled “compostable, ” 
“bio-degradable, ” “oxo-degradable, ” or “bio-based. ” These packages are 
highlighting the origin of the packaging material and/or its ability to 
degrade. The materials can be made from renewable sources (e.g.: 
second generation feedstocks), or are in some cases fossil-based. 
Plastic material made from bio-based material may not necessarily 
be bio-degradable. This broad group of packaging could be regarded 
as a subcategory of sustainable packaging, however, one must consider 
the material’s origin, and especially in the case of displacement of food 
crops with biomass waste or residues, e.g., unavoidable agricultural or 
forestry wastes as well as their potential degradability at end of life 
alternative ( Cruz et al., 2022 ). Moreover, such terms are a big source 
of confusion not only among consumers, therefore could lead to an 
environmental risk in the long term.TABLE 1 (Continued)
Terms Definitions/characterizations Source
Compostable packaging Compostable packaging refers to materials which break down and degrade in the 
environment, but consists of only organic elements that degrade in the environment 
without leaving any toxic residue. All compostable materials are biodegradable, but 
not all biodegradable materials are compostable.Reichert et al. (2020) ; Allison et al. 
(2021)
Edible packaging (films, coatings) Edible packaging is a wrapping or coating that is an integral part of the (food) 
product, fully degradable and can be eaten with the product.Petkoska et al. (2021) ; Janjarasskul and 
Krochta (2010) ; Kadzińska et al. (2019) ; 
Cutter (2006)
Other sustainable packaging (5)
(Eco) Refill packaging Refill packaging prolongs the lifetime of (parent) packaging through a second more 
lightweight and flexible packaging (but also considered as a supplementary one-way 
product).Van Sluisveld and Worrell (2013)
Non-excessive packaging Non-excessive packaging refers to a packaging redesign, where abundant 
components are removed without compromising other packaging functions, quality, 
and esthetics.Van Sluisveld and Worrell (2013)
Lightweight packaging; Downgauging 
packagingLightweight packaging decreases the external dimensions of packaging, while 
maintaining similar inner dimensions, while offering the same or an enhanced 
packaging strength [e.g.: reducing the average thickness of the original material; 
replacing original material for a more lightweight alternative (composite)].Van Sluisveld and Worrell (2013)
Innovative packaging This includes novel materials in mono- or multilayers while decreasing the 
environmental pressure by considering a broad range of sustainability issues (e.g.: 
waste prevention, efficient use of resources, process optimization, recycle, reuse). 
Innovative packaging is more of a design and holistic approach.Reichert et al. (2020) ; Vanderroost et al. 
(2014)
The order of the terms was established based on relevance. The number of identified synonyms are in parentheses. The number of references used in the table depended on the number of 
identified synonyms for the same term and on the accuracy of the definition in the literature.
TABLE 2 Review of challenges for sustainable packaging solutions.
1 The protection of food products takes center stage
2 The food product-package is one inseparable unit
3 For food packaging both direct and indirect sustainability effects must 
be considered
4 Food packaging is a resource, not litter
5 Avoidance of food packaging is not always the best option
6 Sustainable food packaging development, in practice, is a balancing act
7 Multidisciplinary approach is needed to create sustainable food packaging 
solutions
8 Not all food packaging innovation is sustainable
9 Context (local) is key to food packaging sustainability
10 Regulatory landscape of sustainable food packaging is not fully 
comprehensive
11 Consumer knowledge and awareness on sustainable food packaging is 
limited
12 Food packaging is an information source on both product and packaging 
sustainability
The order of the challenges was established based on relevance.