Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 08 frontiersin.orgapplications, it is fundamental to implement appropriate innovative 
functionalization strategies; among these, the use of nanotechnologies, 
blending and/or filling technologies, the development of active 
packaging, the realization of high performance active and passive 
coatings and layers orientation. The combination of multiple 
requirements and sustainability implementation possibilities makes 
sustainable packaging development an extremely difficult balancing 
act which is hard to measure. As a consequence, in practice, 
sustainability in packaging development is still limited ( de Koeijer 
et al., 2017 ).
3.2.7. Multidisciplinary approach is needed to 
create sustainable food packaging solutions
Packaging sustainability is defined and measured differently 
depending on the discipline ( Jiménez-Guerrero et al., 2015 ; Martinho 
et al., 2015 ; Han et al., 2018 ; Herbes et al., 2020 ; Zeng and Durif, 2020 ; 
Wandosell et  al., 2021 ; Zeng et  al., 2021 ). For example, from the 
materials engineering perspective packaging sustainability means 
balancing resource use while optimizing the properties of the 
packaging source material (e.g.: ease in processability, low energy 
consumption, or less use of chemicals in production or end of life). In 
this case sustainability is mostly measured by LCA ( Steenis et al., 2018 ). 
The process is not easy, especially if data input is poor ( Radonjič, 2019 ), 
but at least with LCA it is possible to give an exact answer between 
scenarios. On the other hand, from a marketing perspective, packaging 
is an essential tool to communicate and influence consumers ( Dörnyei 
and Lunardo, 2021 ), deliver information, and aid in decision making. 
In this case the effectiveness of a package is mostly measured by 
consumers’ willingness to buy, and sustainability is only applied with 
designs that facilitate sales goals. Companies have clear ambitions with 
regard to improving food packaging sustainability; but not at the 
expense of product’s market potential. However, as far apart as the two 
disciplines are at the current time, they must work together to find 
optimal sustainable packaging solutions for food products.
3.2.8. Not all food packaging innovation is 
sustainable
When developing innovative sustainable food packaging 
solutions, challenges of technological nature, concerning materials 
and processes, can be encountered. For example, in an attempt to 
replace fossil-fuel-based plastics, the use of renewable materials in 
bio-plastics is steadily growing ( Cruz et al., 2022 ; Rosenboom et al., 
2022 ; Shlush and Davidovich-Pinhas, 2022 ). Although the use of 
bio-plastic is associated with positive consumer perception ( Herbes 
et  al., 2018 ), these materials may not be  necessarily compostable, 
biodegradable, recyclable, or may be a challenge to sort depending on 
the economies of scale in the various municipalities. In addition, some 
technological properties of these materials are still not fully 
satisfactory, hindering their large market uptake. Among these, raw 
material variability, a too narrow processing window, inherent 
brittleness, poor barrier properties, scarce impact and thermal 
resistance. As for the processes, a fundamental requirement for the 
implementation of innovative sustainable packaging solutions on a 
large scale is industrial feasibility. In general, non-invasive innovations 
compared to conventional technologies (e.g., redesigning packaging 
by reducing thickness and weight) are excellent options for improving 
current practices and are generally welcomed and accepted by all 
stakeholders. On the other hand, more invasive innovations (for example the use of new materials or “niche” technological innovations, 
not compatible with conventional manufacturing processes or 
machin-ability) often raise a number of additional problems along the 
value chain, will rarely meet industrial acceptance and may create 
confusion and slow down acceptance and implementation ( Morone 
and Imbert, 2020 ).
3.2.9. Context (local) is key to food packaging 
sustainability
Determining the sustainability of the food packaging solution by 
omitting the context in which the solution exists can lead to incorrect 
evaluations. The context, i.e., country of origin, consumption region 
and supply chains, specific product features, and user (consumer) 
habits, plays a major role in determining packaging sustainability 
(Lindh et al., 2016 ). For example, an LCA analysis of packaging for 
olive oil demonstrated that while glass bottles are preferable for local 
distribution, tinplate cans are more sustainable for long-distance 
distribution ( Guiso et al., 2016 ). Therefore, including more context-
specific factors into sustainable packaging evaluations will lead to 
more sustainable and transparent solutions, toward true 
harmonization of sustainable packaging in the marketplace.
3.2.10. Regulatory landscape of sustainable food 
packaging is not fully comprehensive
Sustainable packaging is not yet properly defined by law, current 
regulations are not comprehensive and often misleading to some 
extent, which makes it a challenge to design truly sustainable packaging 
solutions. Similarly, unnecessary packaging is also an ill-defined 
concept. Labeling regulations are also limited: uses of claims (symbol, 
color) which falsely convey that the package is more sustainable than 
the alternative in the market can be  misleading and lead to 
greenwashing ( Boz et al., 2020 ). It is then clear the need for a shared 
regulatory framework, which constitutes a guideline for the sustainable 
design of packaging and is supported by consumer engagement, 
through a more transparent communication ( Dörnyei et al., 2022 ).
3.2.11. Consumer knowledge and awareness on 
sustainable food packaging is limited
Recent studies highlight that consumers show increasing concern 
about sustainability issues, and sustainability affected food 
consumption is becoming a genuine driver of choice ( Trivium 
Packaging, 2022 ). It is critical therefore that consumers are provided 
with information on the sustainability of the food package, and that 
there are clear instructions also on how to dispose of the food package 
at the post consumer phase. Indeed, the consumer is mindful of the 
environment but is often poorly informed about specific issues, for 
example, the degree of sustainability of the various materials and the 
context in which they are used. Consumers are often not able to 
distinguish between industrial composting and household (home-) 
composting, in addition, there is no real control (composition, rest of 
plastic fragments, etc) on the compost made at home, which may 
result in more littering. Recent evidence also shows that the 
sustainability rating of European consumers and scientific LCAs 
currently are misaligned ( Otto et al., 2021 ). Moreover, complexity in 
use of terms (as already described above) also hinders consumer 
understanding of truly sustainable packaging choices. Consumer 
knowledge about packaging sustainability needs to be improved to 
prevent and avoid greenwashing at consumer but also at industry level.