Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 06 frontiersin.org3.1.4. Other sustainable packaging
Packages in this category fulfill certain aspects of sustainability 
(Lewis et al., 2007 , 2010 ; Santi et al., 2022 ), which looks at broader 
solutions for sustainable packaging, leading to effective, efficient, cyclic 
and safe practices. For example, refills, innovative and lightweight 
packages indicate solutions which bring significant improvements to 
current practices, and to some extent also are easily demonstrating to 
the end user (i.e., consumer) the improved function; for example, they 
lead to minimizing food waste, decrease plastic littering, or improving 
waste sorting are indicated in the definitions. These can be  also 
considered as a subcategory of sustainable packaging.Based on the numerous (38) expressions collected, one can 
conclude that, unfortunately, literature uses too many terms, of which 
many are very similar (see synonyms such as ‘Environmentally 
friendly’ , ‘Eco-friendly’ , ‘Ecologically responsible’ , ‘Ecologically 
conscious’ , ‘Pro-environmental’ , ‘Eco-designed). In many cases the 
definitions are superficial and cannot be used outside of the context 
they belong to. The definitions treat the three pillars of sustainability 
(natural, human, and economic capital; Hansmann et  al., 2012 ) 
unequally, and the environment gets the most focus. Moreover, there 
is little emphasis on the role (responsibility) that the actors (i.e., 
consumers, managers) may play, and, more importantly, these terms 
do not relate the packaging together with the product, which in food 
is a grave simplification. The use of technical terms also may present 
communication challenges, as this may hinder the public (mostly 
consumers, but also journalists and managers) to understand, evaluate 
and make appropriate practical decisions. Hence, the current 
definitions of sustainable packaging are too complex and cannot 
be communicated well because consumers and other stakeholders do 
not have enough abilities (will) to process this information ( Dörnyei 
et al., 2017 ). All these factors can lead to the so-called problem of 
‘information overload’ , or worse, to misleading communication of 
sustainable packaging (greenwashing).
3.2. Challenges and reasons for updating 
sustainable food packaging
A review of the literature also brings up some of the important 
challenges in relation to re-defining the concept of food packaging 
sustainability (see Table 2 ).
FIGURE 2
Co-occurrence analysis of the most relevant papers in literature. Size of the nodes represent more frequently used terms. Different colors represent 
different clusters. The minimum number of terms is 10, at least 30 times occurring /terms.
FIGURE 1
Number of publications on sustainable food packaging between 
2002 and July 2022.