Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 03 frontiersin.orgextracted to create a knowledge database. The search string was 
composed of the following keywords and fields: ‘Topic: Food’; ‘ All 
fields: Packaging’; Abstract: ‘sustainability’ , ‘sustainable’ , 
‘environmental’ , ‘circular’ , ‘green’ , ‘eco-friendly’ or ‘eco friendly’ . 
Boolean operators “ AND” and “OR” were used to combine the three 
defined research fields and keywords. If needed, additional articles 
were also employed for analysis to further clarify some of the concepts. 
The descriptive results of the literature search are described in 
Section 2.2.
In the second phase, relevant articles were qualitatively analyzed 
to review the terminology, to identify critical issues and to create an 
updated definition for sustainable packaging. Thirdly, a technique 
similar to Delphi (structured communication with qualitative 
analyzing approach) was used in two rounds to complete the initial 
review of the terminology, to refine the list of critical issues and to 
finalize the new definition. Similar methodologies are often used in 
many areas of science to find a consensus of a group of 
experts‘opinion with controlled opinion feedback ( Dalkey and 
Helmer, 1963 ; Hasson and Keeney, 2011 ; Niederberger and 
Spranger, 2020 ), and it serves an important basis for evaluating 
previous results and often useful when opinions from an expert 
group are presumably more accurate than those from unstructured 
groups ( Niederberger and Spranger, 2020 ), especially in a field 
where incomplete knowledge is evident ( Giannarou and Zervas, 
2014 ). First, a small panel of experts (a group of 5 experts; without 
anonymity) was selected based on interdisciplinarity and expertise 
in the field of sustainable packaging. During a series of online 
meetings all experts presented their views, then responses were 
collected, conflicting viewpoints were identified, analyzed and 
discussed until consensus was reached. The group’s views were 
analyzed qualitatively, and the initial text was modified accordingly. 
In the second round a larger panel was constructed (a group of 20 
experts including the previous experts) to collect different views in 
written form. Again, viewpoints were identified, analyzed and 
discussed until consensus was reached.
As a result, a review of terminology arranged based on agreed 
relevance ( Table 1 ; discussed in Section 3.1), a review of challenges 
(Table 2 ; discussed in Section 3.2) and the new definition (discussed 
in Section 4) for sustainable packaging were established.
2.2. General search results
The search with the keyword ‘food’ as a topic narrowed down the 
search to 854,551 references, while ‘packaging’ limited the search to 
121,981 references. After applying the ‘sustainability’ keyword (or a 
synonym such as ‘sustainable’ , ‘environmental’ , ‘circular’ , ‘green’ , 
‘eco-friendly’ or ‘eco friendly’) the article search resulted in a database 
of 3,850 references.
In general, results show that the food packaging community at 
large, which includes researchers, practitioners, industry and 
marketing experts, has been increasingly focused on finding 
sustainable packaging solutions for food products. This is well 
reflected in Figure 1 , where the number of publications related to 
‘sustainable food packaging’ have exponentially grown in the past 
20 years with a steep increase in the years between 2019 and 2022. The 
trend can be assumed to continue in the near future, which makes the 
aim of this article especially relevant.Results also show limited integration between disciplines, or 
connections between consumers, materials and food (see Figure 2 ). 
The lack of multidisciplinary research can also be a reason for missing 
clear definitions in the food packaging topic. For example, a large 
number of articles are related to technical (material) fields, such as 
antimicrobial substances to increase product shelf life. While other 
articles use more general terms and focus on consumer related issues 
without material related terms. Moreover, the absence of terms related 
to end of life also indicates the need for a more integrated (holistic) 
approach in this field, which can be completed first in a definition that 
can be easily understood by everyone.
3. Results
3.1. Previously used terms and definitions 
of sustainable packaging
Different terms used in previous research for sustainable 
packaging were reviewed (see Table  1 , which summarizes the 38 
different packaging terms related to the concept of sustainable 
packaging). All these terms highlight the (reduction of) impact that 
packaging has on the environment or society ( Ilgin and Gupta, 2010 ; 
Prakash and Pathak, 2017 ; Nguyen et al., 2020 ; Zeng and Durif, 2020 ). 
The used terms have been summarized in four clusters: ‘Sustainable 
packaging’ , ‘Circular packaging’ , ‘Bio packaging ’ and ‘Other sustainable’ .
3.1.1. Sustainable packaging
Packaging solutions in this category include the Triple Bottom 
Line (TBL) approach based on economic, social, and environmental 
impacts ( Jain and Hudnurkar, 2022 ) and their integration into the life 
cycle of the packaging material—from cradle to grave—throughout 
each stage of the supply chain. Terms like environmentally friendly 
and green packaging are often used as synonyms for sustainable 
packaging, therefore those were also put in this category; however, 
these are not necessarily synonyms. When describing sustainable 
packaging, authors either used their own definitions or the definitions 
by the Sustainable Packaging Coalition (2005 , 2009)  or the Sustainable 
Packaging Alliance (2004) . These definitions offer a valuable starting 
point, but have also been criticized earlier in literature ( Grönman 
et al., 2013 ). It is also noted that sustainable packaging always comes 
with an environmental impact, therefore ‘more’ and ‘less’ sustainable 
packaging would be a more appropriate term ( Boz et al., 2020 ), or the 
concept of ‘sustainable packaging’ should be deconstructed, because 
this absolute value is rather utopic. Moreover, these terms do not refer, 
at least directly, to the potential of reducing food waste, although this 
may be  sometimes the case, and are mostly focused on avoiding 
unnecessary packaging, overpackaging or single-use plastics, thus 
reducing the direct environmental consequences of the use of 
the materials.
3.1.2. Circular packaging
Packages in this category are designed according to the 
principles of the circular economy. Recyclable, recycled, reusable 
and zero waste are often considered as similar terms, and so 
grouped together. Circular packaging can be  seen as one way 
toward sustainability due to the reduction in new resources entering 
the system. It can be  regarded as a subcategory of sustainable 