Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 02 frontiersin.org1. Introduction
Food packaging solutions are widely recognized to produce 
multiple advantages within the whole food supply chain and related 
stakeholders, but the present consumption rate of materials, linear 
production and consumption models used for packaging, and their 
littering make the current situation no longer bearable. The current 
packaging solutions for food need to be  redesigned in a more 
sustainable way ( Herbes et al., 2020 ; Testa et al., 2020 ). Without a 
doubt, the environmental problems caused by (fossil fuel-based plastic 
and high resource intensive materials) packaging need to be tackled 
by launching new solutions, focusing on refuse, reuse, replace, reduce 
as well as recycle such materials (see e.g.: Papargyropoulou et al., 2014 ; 
Knauf, 2015 ; Van Ewijk and Stegemann, 2016 ). The concept of 
packaging sustainability—in accordance with the Brundtland Report 
(Keeble, 1988 ), is defined as a ‘development that meets the needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs’—has been one of the most highly discussed 
topics for some time ( Nordin and Selke, 2010 ; Boz et al., 2020 ; 
Ketelsen et al., 2020 ), and has been an emerging area of interest for 
scholars and practitioners around the world ( Ketelsen et al., 2020 ; 
Vila-Lopez and Küster-Boluda, 2020 ; Wandosell et al., 2021 ).
Previous papers paved the way toward a sustainable food packaging 
definition ( Wikström et al., 2019 ; Camilleri, 2020 ; Morseletto, 2020 ), but 
it is far from being commonly accepted or well usable in the broad food 
systems domain. Companies (such as Coca-Cola, McDonald’s, Tesco), 
organizations [such as Sustainable Packaging Alliance (SPA) and 
Sustainable Packaging Coalition (SPC)] and academic researchers with 
different academic backgrounds (economic, material sciences, 
environmental management, etc.) have formulated various definitions, 
which are not fully aligned ( Pauer et al., 2019 ). The lack of agreement is 
leading to confusion not only among consumers, who already struggle 
with identifying sustainable packaging solutions at the point of sale ( Boz 
et al., 2020 ; Acuti et al., 2022 ), but presumably also among legislators and 
other supply chain members ( Trubetskaya et al., 2022 ). Lack of a widely 
accepted definition (or use of strict versus vague definitions) may lead to 
major inconsistencies, even to misleading consumers, greenwashing or 
fraud. When there is no clear understanding of what a sustainable food 
packaging is, consumers can make wrong choices even with the best of 
their intentions, from a sustainable point of view (information 
asymmetry; Akerlof, 1970 ). This for example may lead to preferring the 
less sustainable packaging at the expense of the more sustainable one, 
which then may even disappear from the market. This becomes even 
more complicated in situations where organizational changes are needed, 
as for example in tackling solutions linked to re-use of packaging.
This intrinsic controversy that characterizes food products 
complicates the definition of sustainability in the packaging field. 
Current definitions on sustainability of packaging solutions are often 
associated with only waste reduction and pollution prevention. For 
example, the current EU strategies toward the circular economy 
deliver a sustainability definition based on packaging waste reduction 
and support it by the implementation of several tools and requirements 
(European Commission, 2015 , 2019 , 2020 ). This approach may not 
capture the complexity that food packaging has. Food packaging must 
serve some critical basic functions, but developing such packages 
nowadays is more of a balancing act between costs and benefits to 
reach an equilibrium (e.g., less packaging or more food waste). For 
example, it has to protect the food from external influences (physical, 
chemical and biological) throughout the supply chain (including many stages such as point of purchase, use at home and post-use), 
maintain its safety and quality during the given shelf life, refrain from 
releasing harmful substances into the food, respond to the highest 
safety standards, which are set by regulatory agencies ( Begley et al., 
2005 ), provide visual product quality cues and other relevant 
information important for consumers’ trust and ultimately reduce 
food waste and loss. All of these aspects are of critical importance. 
Furthermore, the requirements for packaging may be different for the 
same product in different supply chains (e.g.: kept at ambient, cold, or 
frozen storage), causing increased complexities.
Food packaging has a special place in the plastic packaging debate 
since 40% of the plastic produced, namely PE, PP , PET and PS, is being 
used in food packaging applications ( Plastics Europe, 2021 ), and the 
use of plastic in this domain is seen by consumers as a problem larger 
than climate change ( Otto et al., 2021 ). Selecting the right packaging 
method, material and tailoring properties according to the needs of 
the food product (fit-for-purpose packaging as reported by Verghese 
et  al., 2015 ) is a critical aspect, since every product has its own 
characteristics, thereby having product-specific requirements. All 
those factors add complications when striving for sustainable 
harmonization and obviously cause a new set of challenges at the end 
of life of the particular packaging material ( Bauer et al., 2021 ).
Hence, harmonization is required to ensure uniform strategies when 
defining packaging sustainability and packaged food supply systems, 
across all actors. Furthermore, clear communication to and from 
policymakers is needed—especially in industry sectors where producers 
are overburdened by cost, legislation, and strict but sometimes 
overwhelmingly skewed compliance requirements. A commonly agreed 
holistic definition of sustainable food packaging would show how 
sustainability can be  assessed for food products, would accelerate 
progress, alleviate the discourse, and would assist in the establishment of 
effective collaborations among stakeholders. In addition, this agreement 
will also reduce greenwashing by avoiding the fashionable effects of 
certain terms relating to sustainability, used wrongly or rightly, making 
more complex the consumer’s choice in the end and the work of 
industrials really invested in reducing the environmental impact.
Therefore, the aims of this article are (1) to clarify the currently 
used terms and definitions for sustainable food packaging, (2) to 
identify critical issues which are relevant to the topic, and (3) to offer 
an updated and holistic consensus definition for sustainable food 
packaging. This work was carried out by a vast group of researchers 
engaged in different disciplines of food packaging and with diverse 
research backgrounds, therefore, this new definition intends to 
consider the entire value chain, which extends from raw material 
resources all the way to post consumer processing of the packaging 
material. Contrary to previous definitions, this definition aims to 
be specific to food packaging and be simple yet coherent, holistic and 
harmonic, easily understandable, and communicable to everybody. 
Moreover, this article is written with the undisguised goal of starting 
an international dialog on this very impactful and dynamic subject.
2. Methodology
2.1. Analysis framework
The analysis framework consisted of three steps. Firstly, a 
systematic (narrative) review analysis was performed using Web of 
Science. Articles in a 20 years’ time range (2002 to July 2022) were 