Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
3.2.12. Food packaging is an information source a common definition, but a ‘standard’ to evaluate sustainability in this
on both product and packaging sustainability field. This would reduce the number of vague, confusing, or even
As one of the main contacts in the consumer journey, the package misleading claims, and align common metrics for what sustainability
itself has increasingly become an effective way to communicate with is really about. As there are already problems with the ESG reporting
consumers and other stakeholders about sustainability (Wyrwa and skewing by the companies due to vague framework and assessment,
Barska, 2017). Consumers use multiple attributes and cues, such as the terminology and research must include strictly measured data
packaging design (Otto et al., 2021), verbal attributes (e.g., text labels, with well defined goals, metrics and research framework.
logos and other cues), symbolic and text-based cues (Dinh et al., 2022) It is then not only important to choose the appropriate material, and
to evaluate the sustainability of the food product (such as product to design the appropriate packaging solution, but also awareness,
composition or shelf-life) and its packaging (such as showing garbage education, and communication to the end users are required to ensure
sorting instructions; Magnier and Crié, 2015). This dual task can that the package solution ends up being treated and used the way it is
sometimes confuse users if not sufficiently explicit. intended. Compostability, recyclability, reuse rates for food packaging will
continue to be limited if the practical implementation challenges (such as
infrastructure) are not overcome, and unless the entire community does
4. Updated and holistic definition for
not resort to harmonized policies that reduce these practical challenges.
sustainable food packaging
In the case of food packaging, a consumer centered approach is key to
ensure that the material does not end up as litter or landfill.
The search for sustainable packaging solutions is constantly Being a balancing act, a sustainable food package solution may not
evolving. Thanks to innovation in the food packaging field, be perfect, but contextual, suboptimal and in need of constant
technological advances, and impact assessment methodologies, a fixed validation. It is important to note that food product designers, food
definition of packaging sustainability is logically not possible. scientists and food packaging practitioners have in common the social
However, results provided in this work suggest that there are some responsibility to find the best solution, even when it is not necessarily
major aspects that contribute to a sustainability definition for food easy, affordable or convenient, and when it may require organizational
packaging. A definition that includes all these aspects while giving changes, as we strive to reach global sustainability goals.
space to future innovation is required (Santi et al., 2022). Therefore, a
holistic definition of ‘sustainable food packaging’ is proposed here to
Data availability statement
be used by the broader food packaging community, in both scientific
and mainstream publications.
Sustainable food packaging is an optimized, measured (quantified) The original contributions presented in the study are included in
and validated solution, which takes into consideration the balance of the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed
social, economic, ecological and safe implementations of the circular to the corresponding author.
value chain, based on the entire history (life cycle) of the food product-
package unit.
Author contributions
While the holistic definition was created specifically for the food
domain, it can be also applied to other areas with minor changes. The
definition offered takes into consideration the balance of the lowest KRD and MC: conceptualization and methodology. KRD:
possible use of resources (e.g.: rational use of ecologically available writing—original draft preparation. KRD, IU-U, VK, RW, and MC:
resources, avoidance of unnecessary overconsumption) and at the writing—review and editing. KRD, IU-U, VK, RW, LI, IK, GC, PC,
same time all direct and indirect environmental impacts. It includes MCF, MKP, EA, BM, VF, AA, SY, FP, MD, LJ, VC, and MC: editing. All
all aspects of the food-packaging unit, as well as all stakeholders and authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
actors needs along the supply chain, while being efficient, effective,
Funding
cyclic and safe (Lewis et al., 2007, 2010). Furthermore, it should
be produced from renewable sources, preferably using land and water
resources that do not displace food and feed. This holistic perspective This article/publication is based upon work from COST Action
is key to the ability to take into consideration food safety and Circul-a-bility, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science
packaging functionality into the equation, including consumers, who and Technology; www.cost.eu).
play a key role in ensuring that the intended design is implemented.
The analysis of definitions also shows the necessity to broaden and
Acknowledgments
deepen the aspects of measurement and metrics of sustainable
packaging and to open a new debate in future publications.
Measurement is an important step of the current definition, however Authors would like to thank Anne Mette Emdal Navntoft, from
exact measures that would be associated with this new definition is Aarhus University Library, for her expert advice on the literature search.
not offered here. There are a plethora of metrics to assess packaging
sustainability (e.g.: LCA, Ellen McArthur Circularity index), and the
Conflict of interest
landscape is dynamic, often new metrics emerge. Although the
measurement of sustainability is still not a fully harmonized practice
and often under debate, it should be made a priority to have systems The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
in place that allow comparisons between solutions as they become absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
available. It is then clear that there is a need to come up not only with be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 09 frontiersin.org