Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
3.2.1. The protection of food products takes 3.2.4. Food packaging is a resource, not litter
center stage Packaging is a people-made novel entity (Persson et al., 2022), and
Packaging exists because of the product. This is especially true for it will always have a negative environmental cost; it is not possible to
food products, where packaging can be regarded as an added service have packaging materials with no impact on the environment. All
(Löfgren, 2005; Löfgren et al., 2008). Therefore, the packaging solution packaging material has an environmental footprint (Morgan et al.,
needs to ensure, first and foremost, without compromises, the quality 2022), and there is a cost associated with the resources used, even
and safety of the food it contains (Han et al., 2018). However, this when recycled or reused. In the case of food products, it is important
sometimes includes over-packing with the use of unnecessary long to quantitatively measure the environmental footprint of the food,
shelf life (often forced by retailers) instead of optimal shelf life or ‘just from cradle to grave, including the packaging material with its own
necessary packaging’ (Coffigniez et al., 2021). Food packaging and life-cycle (if circular). Furthermore, the added value the package can
shelf life extension is a balance between the packaging and waste. offer needs to be taken into consideration, together with any littering
Longest shelf life sometimes is not necessary, especially in areas where or recovering efforts (consumer behavior is very important in the late
logistic and technological infrastructure make it possible to consume stages of the life cycle), as well as any reduction in food waste. Food
food in a much shorter time or if products are on average sold much packaging then should be considered as an additional, valuable
before the expiration date. When long distances are instead critical to resource integral part of the food product, and can no longer
provide consumers with healthy and affordable choices (i.e., remote be considered of low value, ending up in litter or waste.
locations) long shelf life is critical to avoiding food waste. This means
that the materials have a verifiable means to ensure – among others 3.2.5. Avoidance of food packaging is not always
– no chemical components in amounts that can endanger the health the best option
of the consumers should migrate from the environment (and from the As with many resources employed in the food system, complete
packaging material) into the food, or release micro/nanoplastics in the avoidance of the packaging use should be the preferred solution, but
environment. Such a product centered approach of packaging is very only if this does not have a detrimental effect on the safety and quality
unique to the food packaging field and significantly complicates the of the product or on minimizing food waste (Beitzen-Heineke et al.,
adoption and validation of universal sustainable packaging solutions. 2017; Williams et al., 2020). In particular, minimizing food waste
needs to be the primary goal. On average, packaging is estimated to
3.2.2. The food product-package is one account for only 10% of the total energy inputs for one person’s weekly
inseparable unit consumption of food, while it plays a critical role in ensuring that the
To evaluate and measure the sustainability of packaged food other 90% of energy inputs to the supply chain are not wasted
products, the product and (and not necessarily only the primary) (Verghese et al., 2015). Instead, a critical hierarchy needs to
container should be regarded as a unit with a common environmental be established, and it has to be related to an overall decrease of the
footprint, and the material should not be evaluated alone itself, nor footprint, as quantified for example using a life cycle assessment
the food (Meherishi et al., 2021). In particular, for food, it should (LCA), which takes into consideration all resources, as well as the end
be emphasized that primary packaging prevents food waste, which is of life and food waste (Nguyen et al., 2020), and a social life cycle
a very important aspect of the environmental footprint (Dilkes- assessment (SLCA), which is aimed at evaluating social and
Hoffman et al., 2018; Molina-Besch et al., 2019). Food waste socioeconomic aspects of product-packaging units (Jørgensen, 2013).
contributes to a significant amount of the total greenhouse gas
emissions of the food, and once it is processed, all resources used are 3.2.6. Sustainable food packaging development,
part of the final balance. The package is only a portion of the entire in practice, is a balancing act
footprint (Crippa et al., 2021). Hence, no sustainable solutions can A well designed package needs to fulfill basic important functions,
be found where the quality and shelf life of the product such as protection, storage, loading and transport, marketing, sale,
are compromised. promotion and communication, and impart trust of the food to the
consumer, a ‘guarantee’ of its quality and consistency (Molina-Besch
3.2.3. For food packaging both direct and indirect et al., 2019; Ketelsen et al., 2020); all of this while also satisfying any
sustainability effects must be considered sustainability requirements originating from the entire life of the
Environmental impacts related to food packaging could be the product-package unit, including, but not limited to, logistics,
result of direct (refer to the impacts caused during production, production, engineering, material sources, end of life functions such
consumption, and disposal) or indirect (refer to the impacts as sorting, composting or recycling (Lindh et al., 2016; Wandosell
generated by the industries that supply the final production point) et al., 2021). A sustainable packaging can be achieved by operating on
effects on the environment (Lindh et al., 2016). While the negative three different levels: (1) at the level of raw materials (through the use
direct effects of packages are usually considered in sustainability of recycled raw materials, renewable resources or deriving from the
evaluations, the positive or negative indirect effects that packaging revaluation of industrial processing waste); (2) at the production level
could provide through food product protection, supply chain, or (through more energy efficient processes); and (3) at the level of
sorting and end of life are not always included. In case of packaged eco-design (through the reduction of thicknesses and weights; the
food products, the two environmental effects need to be considered realization of mono materials, fully recyclable structures in alternative
together (de Koeijer et al., 2017) as including indirect effects may to heterogeneous, multi material packaging, which are harder to sort;
show very different overall environmental impact, depending on the the realization of biodegradable and/or compostable packaging, in
food-packaging system (Williams and Wikström, 2011; Wikström alternative to fossil fuel-based materials). In order to provide
et al., 2016). sustainable packaging with satisfying performance suitable for food
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 07 frontiersin.org