Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
3.1.4. Other sustainable packaging Based on the numerous (38) expressions collected, one can
Packages in this category fulfill certain aspects of sustainability conclude that, unfortunately, literature uses too many terms, of which
(Lewis et al., 2007, 2010; Santi et al., 2022), which looks at broader many are very similar (see synonyms such as ‘Environmentally
solutions for sustainable packaging, leading to effective, efficient, cyclic friendly’, ‘Eco-friendly’, ‘Ecologically responsible’, ‘Ecologically
and safe practices. For example, refills, innovative and lightweight conscious’, ‘Pro-environmental’, ‘Eco-designed). In many cases the
packages indicate solutions which bring significant improvements to definitions are superficial and cannot be used outside of the context
current practices, and to some extent also are easily demonstrating to they belong to. The definitions treat the three pillars of sustainability
the end user (i.e., consumer) the improved function; for example, they (natural, human, and economic capital; Hansmann et al., 2012)
lead to minimizing food waste, decrease plastic littering, or improving unequally, and the environment gets the most focus. Moreover, there
waste sorting are indicated in the definitions. These can be also is little emphasis on the role (responsibility) that the actors (i.e.,
considered as a subcategory of sustainable packaging. consumers, managers) may play, and, more importantly, these terms
do not relate the packaging together with the product, which in food
is a grave simplification. The use of technical terms also may present
communication challenges, as this may hinder the public (mostly
consumers, but also journalists and managers) to understand, evaluate
and make appropriate practical decisions. Hence, the current
definitions of sustainable packaging are too complex and cannot
be communicated well because consumers and other stakeholders do
not have enough abilities (will) to process this information (Dörnyei
et al., 2017). All these factors can lead to the so-called problem of
‘information overload’, or worse, to misleading communication of
sustainable packaging (greenwashing).
3.2. Challenges and reasons for updating
sustainable food packaging
FIGURE 1
A review of the literature also brings up some of the important
Number of publications on sustainable food packaging between
2002 and July 2022. challenges in relation to re-defining the concept of food packaging
sustainability (see Table 2).
FIGURE 2
Co-occurrence analysis of the most relevant papers in literature. Size of the nodes represent more frequently used terms. Different colors represent
different clusters. The minimum number of terms is 10, at least 30 times occurring /terms.
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 06 frontiersin.org