Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
applications, it is fundamental to implement appropriate innovative example the use of new materials or “niche” technological innovations,
functionalization strategies; among these, the use of nanotechnologies, not compatible with conventional manufacturing processes or
blending and/or filling technologies, the development of active machin-ability) often raise a number of additional problems along the
packaging, the realization of high performance active and passive value chain, will rarely meet industrial acceptance and may create
coatings and layers orientation. The combination of multiple confusion and slow down acceptance and implementation (Morone
requirements and sustainability implementation possibilities makes and Imbert, 2020).
sustainable packaging development an extremely difficult balancing
act which is hard to measure. As a consequence, in practice, 3.2.9. Context (local) is key to food packaging
sustainability in packaging development is still limited (de Koeijer sustainability
et al., 2017). Determining the sustainability of the food packaging solution by
omitting the context in which the solution exists can lead to incorrect
3.2.7. Multidisciplinary approach is needed to evaluations. The context, i.e., country of origin, consumption region
create sustainable food packaging solutions and supply chains, specific product features, and user (consumer)
Packaging sustainability is defined and measured differently habits, plays a major role in determining packaging sustainability
depending on the discipline (Jiménez-Guerrero et al., 2015; Martinho (Lindh et al., 2016). For example, an LCA analysis of packaging for
et al., 2015; Han et al., 2018; Herbes et al., 2020; Zeng and Durif, 2020; olive oil demonstrated that while glass bottles are preferable for local
Wandosell et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2021). For example, from the distribution, tinplate cans are more sustainable for long-distance
materials engineering perspective packaging sustainability means distribution (Guiso et al., 2016). Therefore, including more context-
balancing resource use while optimizing the properties of the specific factors into sustainable packaging evaluations will lead to
packaging source material (e.g.: ease in processability, low energy more sustainable and transparent solutions, toward true
consumption, or less use of chemicals in production or end of life). In harmonization of sustainable packaging in the marketplace.
this case sustainability is mostly measured by LCA (Steenis et al., 2018).
The process is not easy, especially if data input is poor (Radonjič, 2019), 3.2.10. Regulatory landscape of sustainable food
but at least with LCA it is possible to give an exact answer between packaging is not fully comprehensive
scenarios. On the other hand, from a marketing perspective, packaging Sustainable packaging is not yet properly defined by law, current
is an essential tool to communicate and influence consumers (Dörnyei regulations are not comprehensive and often misleading to some
and Lunardo, 2021), deliver information, and aid in decision making. extent, which makes it a challenge to design truly sustainable packaging
In this case the effectiveness of a package is mostly measured by solutions. Similarly, unnecessary packaging is also an ill-defined
consumers’ willingness to buy, and sustainability is only applied with concept. Labeling regulations are also limited: uses of claims (symbol,
designs that facilitate sales goals. Companies have clear ambitions with color) which falsely convey that the package is more sustainable than
regard to improving food packaging sustainability; but not at the the alternative in the market can be misleading and lead to
expense of product’s market potential. However, as far apart as the two greenwashing (Boz et al., 2020). It is then clear the need for a shared
disciplines are at the current time, they must work together to find regulatory framework, which constitutes a guideline for the sustainable
optimal sustainable packaging solutions for food products. design of packaging and is supported by consumer engagement,
through a more transparent communication (Dörnyei et al., 2022).
3.2.8. Not all food packaging innovation is
sustainable 3.2.11. Consumer knowledge and awareness on
When developing innovative sustainable food packaging sustainable food packaging is limited
solutions, challenges of technological nature, concerning materials Recent studies highlight that consumers show increasing concern
and processes, can be encountered. For example, in an attempt to about sustainability issues, and sustainability affected food
replace fossil-fuel-based plastics, the use of renewable materials in consumption is becoming a genuine driver of choice (Trivium
bio-plastics is steadily growing (Cruz et al., 2022; Rosenboom et al., Packaging, 2022). It is critical therefore that consumers are provided
2022; Shlush and Davidovich-Pinhas, 2022). Although the use of with information on the sustainability of the food package, and that
bio-plastic is associated with positive consumer perception (Herbes there are clear instructions also on how to dispose of the food package
et al., 2018), these materials may not be necessarily compostable, at the post consumer phase. Indeed, the consumer is mindful of the
biodegradable, recyclable, or may be a challenge to sort depending on environment but is often poorly informed about specific issues, for
the economies of scale in the various municipalities. In addition, some example, the degree of sustainability of the various materials and the
technological properties of these materials are still not fully context in which they are used. Consumers are often not able to
satisfactory, hindering their large market uptake. Among these, raw distinguish between industrial composting and household (home-)
material variability, a too narrow processing window, inherent composting, in addition, there is no real control (composition, rest of
brittleness, poor barrier properties, scarce impact and thermal plastic fragments, etc) on the compost made at home, which may
resistance. As for the processes, a fundamental requirement for the result in more littering. Recent evidence also shows that the
implementation of innovative sustainable packaging solutions on a sustainability rating of European consumers and scientific LCAs
large scale is industrial feasibility. In general, non-invasive innovations currently are misaligned (Otto et al., 2021). Moreover, complexity in
compared to conventional technologies (e.g., redesigning packaging use of terms (as already described above) also hinders consumer
by reducing thickness and weight) are excellent options for improving understanding of truly sustainable packaging choices. Consumer
current practices and are generally welcomed and accepted by all knowledge about packaging sustainability needs to be improved to
stakeholders. On the other hand, more invasive innovations (for prevent and avoid greenwashing at consumer but also at industry level.
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 08 frontiersin.org