Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
extracted to create a knowledge database. The search string was Results also show limited integration between disciplines, or
composed of the following keywords and fields: ‘Topic: Food’; ‘All connections between consumers, materials and food (see Figure 2).
fields: Packaging’; Abstract: ‘sustainability’, ‘sustainable’, The lack of multidisciplinary research can also be a reason for missing
‘environmental’, ‘circular’, ‘green’, ‘eco-friendly’ or ‘eco friendly’. clear definitions in the food packaging topic. For example, a large
Boolean operators “AND” and “OR” were used to combine the three number of articles are related to technical (material) fields, such as
defined research fields and keywords. If needed, additional articles antimicrobial substances to increase product shelf life. While other
were also employed for analysis to further clarify some of the concepts. articles use more general terms and focus on consumer related issues
The descriptive results of the literature search are described in without material related terms. Moreover, the absence of terms related
Section 2.2. to end of life also indicates the need for a more integrated (holistic)
In the second phase, relevant articles were qualitatively analyzed approach in this field, which can be completed first in a definition that
to review the terminology, to identify critical issues and to create an can be easily understood by everyone.
updated definition for sustainable packaging. Thirdly, a technique
similar to Delphi (structured communication with qualitative
3. Results
analyzing approach) was used in two rounds to complete the initial
review of the terminology, to refine the list of critical issues and to
3.1. Previously used terms and definitions
finalize the new definition. Similar methodologies are often used in
of sustainable packaging
many areas of science to find a consensus of a group of
experts‘opinion with controlled opinion feedback (Dalkey and
Helmer, 1963; Hasson and Keeney, 2011; Niederberger and Different terms used in previous research for sustainable
Spranger, 2020), and it serves an important basis for evaluating packaging were reviewed (see Table 1, which summarizes the 38
previous results and often useful when opinions from an expert different packaging terms related to the concept of sustainable
group are presumably more accurate than those from unstructured packaging). All these terms highlight the (reduction of) impact that
groups (Niederberger and Spranger, 2020), especially in a field packaging has on the environment or society (Ilgin and Gupta, 2010;
where incomplete knowledge is evident (Giannarou and Zervas, Prakash and Pathak, 2017; Nguyen et al., 2020; Zeng and Durif, 2020).
2014). First, a small panel of experts (a group of 5 experts; without The used terms have been summarized in four clusters: ‘Sustainable
anonymity) was selected based on interdisciplinarity and expertise packaging’, ‘Circular packaging’, ‘Bio packaging’ and ‘Other sustainable’.
in the field of sustainable packaging. During a series of online
meetings all experts presented their views, then responses were 3.1.1. Sustainable packaging
collected, conflicting viewpoints were identified, analyzed and Packaging solutions in this category include the Triple Bottom
discussed until consensus was reached. The group’s views were Line (TBL) approach based on economic, social, and environmental
analyzed qualitatively, and the initial text was modified accordingly. impacts (Jain and Hudnurkar, 2022) and their integration into the life
In the second round a larger panel was constructed (a group of 20 cycle of the packaging material—from cradle to grave—throughout
experts including the previous experts) to collect different views in each stage of the supply chain. Terms like environmentally friendly
written form. Again, viewpoints were identified, analyzed and and green packaging are often used as synonyms for sustainable
discussed until consensus was reached. packaging, therefore those were also put in this category; however,
As a result, a review of terminology arranged based on agreed these are not necessarily synonyms. When describing sustainable
relevance (Table 1; discussed in Section 3.1), a review of challenges packaging, authors either used their own definitions or the definitions
(Table 2; discussed in Section 3.2) and the new definition (discussed by the Sustainable Packaging Coalition (2005, 2009) or the Sustainable
in Section 4) for sustainable packaging were established. Packaging Alliance (2004). These definitions offer a valuable starting
point, but have also been criticized earlier in literature (Grönman
et al., 2013). It is also noted that sustainable packaging always comes
2.2. General search results
with an environmental impact, therefore ‘more’ and ‘less’ sustainable
packaging would be a more appropriate term (Boz et al., 2020), or the
The search with the keyword ‘food’ as a topic narrowed down the concept of ‘sustainable packaging’ should be deconstructed, because
search to 854,551 references, while ‘packaging’ limited the search to this absolute value is rather utopic. Moreover, these terms do not refer,
121,981 references. After applying the ‘sustainability’ keyword (or a at least directly, to the potential of reducing food waste, although this
synonym such as ‘sustainable’, ‘environmental’, ‘circular’, ‘green’, may be sometimes the case, and are mostly focused on avoiding
‘eco-friendly’ or ‘eco friendly’) the article search resulted in a database unnecessary packaging, overpackaging or single-use plastics, thus
of 3,850 references. reducing the direct environmental consequences of the use of
In general, results show that the food packaging community at the materials.
large, which includes researchers, practitioners, industry and
marketing experts, has been increasingly focused on finding 3.1.2. Circular packaging
sustainable packaging solutions for food products. This is well Packages in this category are designed according to the
reflected in Figure 1, where the number of publications related to principles of the circular economy. Recyclable, recycled, reusable
‘sustainable food packaging’ have exponentially grown in the past and zero waste are often considered as similar terms, and so
20 years with a steep increase in the years between 2019 and 2022. The grouped together. Circular packaging can be seen as one way
trend can be assumed to continue in the near future, which makes the toward sustainability due to the reduction in new resources entering
aim of this article especially relevant. the system. It can be regarded as a subcategory of sustainable
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 03 frontiersin.org