Dörnyei et al. 10.3389/fsufs.2023.1119052
1. Introduction
many stages such as point of purchase, use at home and post-use),
maintain its safety and quality during the given shelf life, refrain from
Food packaging solutions are widely recognized to produce releasing harmful substances into the food, respond to the highest
multiple advantages within the whole food supply chain and related safety standards, which are set by regulatory agencies (Begley et al.,
stakeholders, but the present consumption rate of materials, linear 2005), provide visual product quality cues and other relevant
production and consumption models used for packaging, and their information important for consumers’ trust and ultimately reduce
littering make the current situation no longer bearable. The current food waste and loss. All of these aspects are of critical importance.
packaging solutions for food need to be redesigned in a more Furthermore, the requirements for packaging may be different for the
sustainable way (Herbes et al., 2020; Testa et al., 2020). Without a same product in different supply chains (e.g.: kept at ambient, cold, or
doubt, the environmental problems caused by (fossil fuel-based plastic frozen storage), causing increased complexities.
and high resource intensive materials) packaging need to be tackled Food packaging has a special place in the plastic packaging debate
by launching new solutions, focusing on refuse, reuse, replace, reduce since 40% of the plastic produced, namely PE, PP, PET and PS, is being
as well as recycle such materials (see e.g.: Papargyropoulou et al., 2014; used in food packaging applications (Plastics Europe, 2021), and the
Knauf, 2015; Van Ewijk and Stegemann, 2016). The concept of use of plastic in this domain is seen by consumers as a problem larger
packaging sustainability—in accordance with the Brundtland Report than climate change (Otto et al., 2021). Selecting the right packaging
(Keeble, 1988), is defined as a ‘development that meets the needs of method, material and tailoring properties according to the needs of
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to the food product (fit-for-purpose packaging as reported by Verghese
meet their own needs’—has been one of the most highly discussed et al., 2015) is a critical aspect, since every product has its own
topics for some time (Nordin and Selke, 2010; Boz et al., 2020; characteristics, thereby having product-specific requirements. All
Ketelsen et al., 2020), and has been an emerging area of interest for those factors add complications when striving for sustainable
scholars and practitioners around the world (Ketelsen et al., 2020; harmonization and obviously cause a new set of challenges at the end
Vila-Lopez and Küster-Boluda, 2020; Wandosell et al., 2021). of life of the particular packaging material (Bauer et al., 2021).
Previous papers paved the way toward a sustainable food packaging Hence, harmonization is required to ensure uniform strategies when
definition (Wikström et al., 2019; Camilleri, 2020; Morseletto, 2020), but defining packaging sustainability and packaged food supply systems,
it is far from being commonly accepted or well usable in the broad food across all actors. Furthermore, clear communication to and from
systems domain. Companies (such as Coca-Cola, McDonald’s, Tesco), policymakers is needed—especially in industry sectors where producers
organizations [such as Sustainable Packaging Alliance (SPA) and are overburdened by cost, legislation, and strict but sometimes
Sustainable Packaging Coalition (SPC)] and academic researchers with overwhelmingly skewed compliance requirements. A commonly agreed
different academic backgrounds (economic, material sciences, holistic definition of sustainable food packaging would show how
environmental management, etc.) have formulated various definitions, sustainability can be assessed for food products, would accelerate
which are not fully aligned (Pauer et al., 2019). The lack of agreement is progress, alleviate the discourse, and would assist in the establishment of
leading to confusion not only among consumers, who already struggle effective collaborations among stakeholders. In addition, this agreement
with identifying sustainable packaging solutions at the point of sale (Boz will also reduce greenwashing by avoiding the fashionable effects of
et al., 2020; Acuti et al., 2022), but presumably also among legislators and certain terms relating to sustainability, used wrongly or rightly, making
other supply chain members (Trubetskaya et al., 2022). Lack of a widely more complex the consumer’s choice in the end and the work of
accepted definition (or use of strict versus vague definitions) may lead to industrials really invested in reducing the environmental impact.
major inconsistencies, even to misleading consumers, greenwashing or Therefore, the aims of this article are (1) to clarify the currently
fraud. When there is no clear understanding of what a sustainable food used terms and definitions for sustainable food packaging, (2) to
packaging is, consumers can make wrong choices even with the best of identify critical issues which are relevant to the topic, and (3) to offer
their intentions, from a sustainable point of view (information an updated and holistic consensus definition for sustainable food
asymmetry; Akerlof, 1970). This for example may lead to preferring the packaging. This work was carried out by a vast group of researchers
less sustainable packaging at the expense of the more sustainable one, engaged in different disciplines of food packaging and with diverse
which then may even disappear from the market. This becomes even research backgrounds, therefore, this new definition intends to
more complicated in situations where organizational changes are needed, consider the entire value chain, which extends from raw material
as for example in tackling solutions linked to re-use of packaging. resources all the way to post consumer processing of the packaging
This intrinsic controversy that characterizes food products material. Contrary to previous definitions, this definition aims to
complicates the definition of sustainability in the packaging field. be specific to food packaging and be simple yet coherent, holistic and
Current definitions on sustainability of packaging solutions are often harmonic, easily understandable, and communicable to everybody.
associated with only waste reduction and pollution prevention. For Moreover, this article is written with the undisguised goal of starting
example, the current EU strategies toward the circular economy an international dialog on this very impactful and dynamic subject.
deliver a sustainability definition based on packaging waste reduction
and support it by the implementation of several tools and requirements
2. Methodology
(European Commission, 2015, 2019, 2020). This approach may not
capture the complexity that food packaging has. Food packaging must
2.1. Analysis framework
serve some critical basic functions, but developing such packages
nowadays is more of a balancing act between costs and benefits to
reach an equilibrium (e.g., less packaging or more food waste). For The analysis framework consisted of three steps. Firstly, a
example, it has to protect the food from external influences (physical, systematic (narrative) review analysis was performed using Web of
chemical and biological) throughout the supply chain (including Science. Articles in a 20 years’ time range (2002 to July 2022) were
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 02 frontiersin.org